How to Spice Up Your Meals With Ground Chili Powder

Ground chili pepper is a popular spice mix found in a variety of cuisines from around the world, including Mexican, Korean, Indian, Thai, Chinese and Western American cuisines. It's also referred to as dried chile or powdered chile. In its purest form, it's usually a mixture of several dried chili peppers, together with other spices, such as cinnamon or cloves. These spices are combined to create a coarse texture and rich flavor. Ground chiles vary in size, depending on the species of chilies being used and their maturity, from the small cayenne pepper found in south Texas to the long sleeve pepper prized by many connoisseurs in the New World.

A more common way of using ground chili powder, however, is in stews. It adds a depth and flavor not found in stir-fry. Most commonly, the heat from the chiles is tempered by a few minutes' wait in order for the flavors to truly meld well with the food being prepared. This method of using chili powder in a stew allows you to use just a teaspoonful of the spice, to bring out the natural flavors in the foods you're preparing, while creating a gentle yet robust flavor that is almost spicy at the same time. You can find recipes for this type of dish in numerous cookbooks and on the Internet.

Another way to use ground chili powder is to mix it into flour to make the dough for tortillas, which can then be filled with beef, chicken, or vegetables. This powder mixture can also be added to soups to help them add flavor and color. It may be mixed into sauces to give them an intense heat, as is often the case with a hot casserole. And, it certainly comes in handy when making black bean dip. The blend will give it a unique flavor not found with other spices or vegetables.

It's not difficult to mix ground chili powder into flour to make very tender cornbread or bread crumbs. Likewise, it makes an excellent addition to soups, stews, and casseroles. Since chilis are typically made with beef, chicken, or pork, food processors that have a small blade are an excellent choice for mixing the powder into dry foods.

Many people don't realize how versatile dried spices can be in their everyday cooking. They're essentially there to give your food a more authentic "cooked from scratch" flavor. When using ground chili powder in these dishes, remember to use the amount suggested in the recipe. Too much spice, or too little, will lead to an under-developed taste in your food.

chili is the classic food of Mexico. Because it has such a robust flavor, it's used in so many dishes that it's become synonymous with Mexican cuisine. And while many Mexican recipes are distinctly Mexican, they also frequently incorporate ground chili powder as a flavor component. This is particularly true of the south Texas recipes that are born out of the heat and brimbyness of the Gulf coast state. Home cooks have created their own versions of these popular recipes for years, relying on the intense flavors of this ground spice to bring out the natural flavors in foods.

So next time you want to create an authentic dish, try using a bit of this flavor with your meal. Or try incorporating it into the many traditional chili recipes you'll find. Even if you use canned or store-bought chilis, adding a bit of this chili powder will give you a shot at recreating some of the flavors found in authentic Mexican cuisine. It's the little extras that add the punch to many dishes.

You can find plenty of recipes using this chili powder, too. Some options include baked red or green chili, bean dips, chicken kabobs, stews, and corn chips. You can buy pepper, oregano, and cumin seed powder to use in these recipes, but if you don't have any in your cupboard, you can easily substitute chili powder. For the best flavor, however, use just a bit of this powder and let the rest simmer away on its own. It will still give you plenty of spicy flavor, without the burn of other spices.
